---
title: &title "Lunger: Hvor meget er din lungekapacitet? 游꺏 [Beregner]"
permalink: /lunger-lungekapacitet/
language: da
header:
  overlay_image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1555708982-8645ec9ce3cc?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1900&q=80
  teaser: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1555708982-8645ec9ce3cc?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=400&q=80
  caption: *title
category:
  - Fysiologi
tags:
  - lunger
  - lungekapacitet
  - fysiologi
last_modified_at: 2020-10-13T23:14:14Z
toc: true
---

Lungerne er udgangspunktet for at f친 ilt. Jeg har kigget lidt p친, hvor meget luft mennesket kan f친 ind p친 en vejrtr칝kning, og hvad menneskets lungekapacitet er.

## Beregn hvor stor lungekapacitet du har?

{% include calculate-lung.html %}

## Hvad er lungekapacitet?

Du kan m친le forskellige lungekapaciteter med et _spirometer_. 

- IRV - Inspiratory Reserve Volume
- TV - Tidal Volume
- ERV - Expiratory Reserve Volume
- RV - Residual Volume

## Hvad er vitalkapaciteten?

Vitalkapaciten (VC) er den volumen af luft, som kan ud친ndes fra lungerne efter en maksimal ind친nding. Vitalkapaciteten udregnes i denne formular.

Rent teknisk f친r man vitalkapaciteten ved at l칝gge Inspiratory Reserve Volume, tidalvolumen og Expiratory Reserve Volume samen:

VC = IRV + TV + ERV

Typisk er vitalkapaciteten mellem 3-5 liter for voksne. Den estimerede vitalkapacitet kan estimeres p친 baggrund af k칮n, alder og h칮jde.

Denne beregner fors칮ger at udregne vitalkapaciteten baseret p친 formlen fra [Baldwin et al](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18885031), som ogs친 bruges i denne udregner af [vitalkapaciteten](https://www.omnicalculator.com/health/vital-capacity).

{% comment %}

Using our vital capacity calculator and only the values of your age and height, you can estimate the volume of air that flows through your lungs. In contrast to the lung capacities calculated from spirometric measurements, this calculator uses a vital capacity equation that estimates the theoretical, predicted value.
Read on if you're interested to know how to calculate vital capacity on your own, or what formula we used here.



What's the vital capacity equation?
The vital capacity of a person can be estimated using this equation, developed by Baldwin et al:

for females: height * ( 21.78 - 0.101 * age )

for males: height * ( 27.63 - 0.112 * age )

In these formulas, the height should be given in centimeters (cm), and the result is expressed in cubic centimeters (cm췁), but you can easily switch between metric and imperial units by clicking on the unit name in the calculator.

How to calculate vital capacity?
Choose whether you're male or female - the vital capacity equation differs slightly, depending on the given sex.
Enter your age in years.
Enter your height in preferred units.
The calculated Vital Capacity is shown in the last field of the calculator.
A healthy person's vital capacity should be between 3 and 5 liters. This value depends on age, sex, weight, height, and ethnicity.

The vital capacity is a parameter used to differentiate between the causes of lung diseases. If it's decreased, it points to the diagnosis of restrictive lung disease, whereas in the case of obstructive lung disease the VC is usually normal or slightly decreased.

What's the total lung, inspiratory, and vital capacity formula?
The pulmonary function is checked in a ventilatory test called spirometry. During the examination, four lung volumes are measured: IRV - inspiratory reserve volume, TV - tidal volume, ERV - expiratory reserve volume, and RV - residual volume. To interpret the results, four so-called lung capacities should be calculated: TLC - total lung capacity, IC - inspiratory capacity, VC - vital capacity, and FRS - functional residual volume.

This is the vital capacity formula based on lung volume measurements:

VC = IRV + TV + ERV

where

IRV - Inspiratory Reserve Volume,

TV - Tidal Volume,

ERV - Expiratory Reserve Volume.

Using this equation can give a different result to the one provided in this calculator. The vital capacity can be used to help differentiate causes of lung disease. In restrictive lung disease, the vital capacity is decreased. In obstructive lung disease, it is usually normal or only slightly decreased.

{% endcomment %}

{% comment %}

https://www.omnicalculator.com/health/lung-capacity

Lung Capacity Calculator

Table of contents:
How to calculate total lung capacity?
How to calculate vital capacity?
How to calculate inspiratory capacity?
How to calculate functional residual capacity?

The lung capacity calculator helps you find the respiratory volumes of your or your patient's lungs.
Scroll down if you're not sure how to calculate Total Lung Capacity (TLC), vital capacity (VC), inspiratory capacity (IC), and functional residual volume (FRS).

The uses four lung volume measurements from spirometry, a ventilatory pulmonary function test:

IRV - Inspiratory Reserve Volume;
TV - Tidal Volume;
ERV - Expiratory Reserve Volume;
RV - Residual Volume.


How to calculate total lung capacity?
Total Lung Capacity (TLC) is the complete sum of the air volume in one's lungs. It can be calculated simply by adding up all the measured lung volumes:

TLC = IRV + TV + ERV + RV

The normal value range for adults is 5 to 7 liters. It depends on age, sex, height, mass, and ethnicity. You can read more on the normal values of lung capacities in this Statement of the European Respiratory Society.

How to calculate vital capacity?
Vital Capacity (VC) is the volume of air that can be expelled from the lungs after a maximal inhalation. The lung capacity calculator finds it by adding the Inspiratory Reserve Volume, Tidal Volume, and Expiratory Reserve Volume:

VC = IRV + TV + ERV

The normal value range for adults is 3 to 5 liters. The predicted value of this capacity can be estimated based on a patient's sex, age and height - use our vital capacity calculator to find it and compare the results.

How to calculate inspiratory capacity?
Inspiratory Capacity (IC) is the maximum volume of air that can be inhaled by the patient without a forced exhalation beforehand. The inspiratory capacity is calculated by adding the Inspiratory Reserve Volume and the Tidal Volume:

IC = IRV + TV

The normal range of inspiratory capacity is around 2 to 4 liters.

How to calculate functional residual capacity?
Functional Residual Capacity (FRS) is the volume of air that remains in our lungs during the whole process of normal breathing in a relaxed state, without forcing the exhalation. It's the sum of Expiratory Reserve Volume and Tidal Volume:

FRS = ERV + RV

A normal FRS should be around 2 liters.

The lung capacity calculator uses liters as default units, but you can switch between metric and imperial units. Click on the unit symbol and choose the unit you prefer.

{% endcomment %}
