---
title: &title "Hvor meget blod har mennesket? 🩸 [Beregner]"
permalink: /hvor-meget-blod-har-mennesket/
language: da
header:
  overlay_image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1572470468728-1b2277637d30?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1950&q=80
  teaser: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1572470468728-1b2277637d30?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=400&q=80
  caption: *title
category:
  - Fysiologi
tags:
  - blod
last_modified_at: 2020-10-13T23:14:14Z
toc: true
---

Blodet er en vigtig transportør af ilt og næringsstoffer, så derfor synes jeg det er interessant at undersøge, hvor meget blod mennesker her - og hvor hurtigt man kan skabe nyt blod.

Jeg har lavet en beregner på, hvor meget blod mennesker har.

## Beregn hvor meget blod du har?

Vores beregner af blodvolumen er baseret på denne [udregner af blodvolumen](https://www.omnicalculator.com/health/blood-volume).

{% include calculate-blood.html %}

## Hjælp med at udvide artiklen

Hvis du har lyst, så har vi brug for at udvide denne artikel.

{% comment %}
Our blood volume calculator uses three methods to determine the total blood volume. The first one uses Dr. Nadler's formula, the second one is an equation developed by Dr. Lemmens, Dr. Bernstein, and Dr. Brodsky, and in advanced mode you can find a very simple method that gives a better perspective on the previous two.
Preoperative assessment of estimated blood volume (BV) is essential for patients undergoing surgery. It impacts perfusion care, including hemodynamic and pharmacologic interventions, and transfusion practices. Keep on reading to understand how blood volume affects blood pressure.

Please note that this is a calculator of blood volume for adults. If you want to estimate the blood volume in a child, use our pediatric blood volume calculator.


How does blood volume calculator work?
There are several methods available to directly or indirectly measure blood volume, but all are impractical in routine clinical practice. The mean value for indexed blood volume (ᵢBV) in normal weight adults is 70 mL/kg for males and 65 mL/kg for females. You can find the option to calculate it this way in advanced mode. Since ᵢBV decreases in a non-linear manner with increasing weight, this value can't be used for obese and morbidly obese patients. The methods of estimating total blood volume we provide here take into account the entire range of body weights.

Nadler's Equation for total blood volume - Method 1
An advanced formula used to calculate blood volume was developed by Dr. Allen in 1956. In 1962, basing on Dr. Allen's work, Dr. Nadler found more accurate coefficients and published the equation in his article titled Prediction of blood volume in normal human adults. Our Blood Volume calculator uses this formula:

For males :
BV = 0.3669 * h³ + 0.03219 * w + 0.6041
For females :
BV = 0.3561 * h³ + 0.03308 * w + 0.1833

Lemmens-Bernstein-Brodsky Equation for estimated blood volume - Method 2

In 2006, Dr. Lemmens, Dr. Bernstein, and Dr. Brodsky discovered an equation that allows physicians to predict ᵢBV over the full spectrum of body weights and body mass indices (BMI) in patients unstressed by acute trauma or critical illness. The blood volume calculator uses this formula:

BV = 70 / √(BMI / 22)

How does blood volume affect blood pressure?

Factors that affect blood pressure (BP) are interconnected:

peripheral resistance - the constriction of the arteries elevates the BP. Peripheral resistance also includes: vessel length, blood viscosity, and arterial stenosis;
total blood volume;
cardiac output.
The dynamic balance between blood volume and blood pressure is regulated by the complex Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone system (RAAS) controlled by the kidneys. In normal conditions, it maintains the blood pressure in the range of 90-140 mmHg (systolic BP) and 60-90 mmHg (diastolic BP).
{% endcomment %}


{% comment %}

Pediatric Blood Volume Calculator
By Małgorzata Koperska, MD

Why is pediatric blood volume useful?
How is the blood volume estimated in pediatrics?
What's the blood volume in a newborn baby?
What's the blood volume in infants and older children?
Our pediatric blood volume calculator uses body weight to find the total blood volume for children. The estimated blood volume in pediatrics depends on the age of a child, so that there are separate formulas for blood volume in newborn babies, in infants under 3 months of age, in children over 3 months, and in adolescents.

Please note that this is a calculator for pediatric use. There is a separate calculator that estimates the blood volume in adults, and one that finds the volume of blood plasma.



Why is pediatric blood volume useful?
Similarly to the adult total blood volume, these values are vital in the hospital perfusion care, including hemodynamic and pharmacologic interventions, and transfusion practices.

Aditionally, these values are also extremely important in the process of blood collection for tests. For an adult patient, collecting 20 ml of blood won't have a noticeable impact on the organism, whereas the same amount of blood is about 8% of a newborn baby's full blood volume. According to the existing guidelines, the maximum volume of blood that can be drawn safely from an infant in 24 hours is ranging from 1% to 5% of the total blood volume.

How is the blood volume estimated in pediatrics?
Our calculator uses the formula:

TBV = weight * age factor

The age factor equals:

100 mL/kg for premature infants;
85 mL/kg for babies younger than 3 months;
75 mL/kg for children over the age of 3 months;
70 mL/kg for male adolescents;
65 mL/kg for female adolescents.

What's the blood volume in a newborn baby?
The volume of blood in a premature neonate ranges from 89 to 105 mL per kilogram of body weight, while a baby born in term has from 82 to 86 mL/kg of blood.

What's the blood volume in infants and older children?
The blood volume in infants up to three months of age is 82-86 mL/kg. It is assumed that after the third month children have around 73-82 mL/kg. The volume of blood per kilogram of body weight decreases with age and in puberty reaches about the same values as in adults, which is 70 mL/kg for males and 65 mL/kg for females.

{% endcomment %}
